Add KubeCon Paris 24 blog post and video (#170)
kairos-io/kairos-docs: content/en/blog/spos-panel-at-kubecon-paris-2024.md

---
title: "SPOS Panel at KubeCon Paris 2024"
date: 2024-03-26T16:53:13+01:00
author: Mauro Morales ([Twitter](https://twitter.com/mauromrls)) ([GitHub](https://github.com/mauromorales))
---

I recently had the opportunity to attend KubeCon 2024. You can find my recap at the [Spectro Cloud Blog](https://www.spectrocloud.com/blog/kubecon-paris-edge-ai-and-la-vie-en-cloud-native), but I'd like to add some additional information about the Special Purpose Operating System Panel in which we participated.

> The panel was schedule for the last day of KubeCon, which I think probably hurt the attendance since many people had already left. Nevertheless, according to the scheduling tool 351 people were planning to attend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The panel was scheduled for the last day of KubeCon, which I think probably hurt the attendance since many people had already left. Nevertheless, according to the scheduling tool, 351 people were planning to attend.
```

> Special Purpose Operating Systems are designed to run well defined workloads with minimal boilerplate of dependencies suited for niche use cases.

In the case of Kairos, our specialization focuses on Day-2 operations on Edge devices, but not excluding other setups including Kubernetes. This means that in our OS we try to pack everything users will need to keep their devices secure, remotely manageable and as lean as possible.

Next, we presented a slide called Landscape which had one axis going from Highly Specialized to Flexible/Customizable. In my opinion this is misleading because as I previously mentioned Kairos is highly specialized, however it is also very flexible and customizable. My best example for this is that we are the only SPOS which can be based on different Linux distributions. If you are looking for such a specialized solution but come from Alpine, Debian, Fedora, openSUSE, Ubuntu or Rocky Linux, you don't have to give up your existing OS know-how because there's a Kairos version for you.

> The landscape analogy still fits, but instead of having to fit the different SPOSes into a made up groups, I think of it consisting areas like Kubernetes, Edge Computing, AI, Data Centers, etc. and each of the different SPOSes being specialized in one or more of these areas. On a completely different axis, we could define the flexibility and costumization for each individual SPOS. For example, Talos, has an opinionated API to handle the OS, so we could consider it more rigid, while all other projects that give ssh access would be on the other end of the spectrum. And this can be applied to different topics, like configuration management, Kubernetes distribution, etc. That rigidity or flexibility is not necessarily good or bad but better depending on what you are trying to achieve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The landscape analogy still fits, but instead of having to fit the different SPOSes into made up groups, I think of it as consisting of areas like Kubernetes, Edge Computing, AI, Data Centers, etc. and each of the different SPOSes being specialized in one or more of these areas. On a completely different axis, we could define the flexibility and customization for each individual SPOS. For example, Talos, has an opinionated API to handle the OS, so we could consider it more rigid, while all other projects that give ssh access would be on the other end of the spectrum. And this can be applied to different topics, like configuration management, Kubernetes distribution, etc. That rigidity or flexibility is not necessarily good or bad but better depending on what you are trying to achieve.
```
